#+title: Open Source Business Metrics Guide: How to Build, Grow, and Measure the Success of an Open Source Business
#+author: Matt Yonkovit
#+lastmod: 2023-01-03
#+categories[]: metrics open-source business
# #+cover: ./images/1000000000000318000003112025EB7DED0EE1C9.png


Open source has become one of the most recognized movements in
technology in the last decade. Already
[[https://www.redhat.com/rhdc/managed-files/rh-enterprise-open-source-report-f27565-202101-en.pdf][/90%
of IT leaders use enterprise open source software/]], and by 2026, the
[[https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/open-source-services-market-27852275.html][/open
source services market will be worth $50 billion/]]. Based on the growth
It is not surprising that the number of open source projects and
businesses based around open source have skyrocketed over the past
decade. While open source itself is not a business model, we can clearly
identify business models built around open source licensing and
philosophies that have proven sustainable, scalable, and profitable. To
build an open source business, it is imperative to grow not only the
business and the adoption of your software but the community around it.
In this guide, we walk you through those challenges and key metrics that
you'll want to track in order to get your open source business off the
ground and keep it up and running.

* Selling open source is very different from classic business models

For years, people have built successful businesses on the idea of
exclusivity and differentiation. If you are the sole exclusive
manufacturer or distributor of a product, you control the destiny of
your product. Consider the automobile industry, for example. Ford builds
cars. If you want to buy a Ford, you go to a Ford dealership. Ford uses
its channel of dealers to offer you their product. Ford tries to build
better cars than its competition, offering distinction exclusive to
their brand or their umbrella organizations. They may license the
technology to other automotive companies, but Ford controls their
technology, the channels for sale, and ultimately holds more control
over end-to-end business. Whether you are a car manufacturer or software
company selling enterprise software, success is often predicated on
having a better, more popular, or some differentiated product.

In the open source industry, your own product is your greatest
competition. Users can download software for free without any commitment
or even acknowledgment that they are using it. You must be able to
differentiate your paid-for offering enough for users to choose it over
the free version. Referencing our previous car example, it's as if you
could lawfully walk up to a lot, get into a car, and take it home
without paying anything or telling anyone you were taking the car. That
is how most open source projects operate. A person (group or company)
builds software and puts it on the web (or on GitHub) for users to
download, use, and modify for free.

* Building a customer base from the growing adoption of free users

Although giving away a product may seem counterintuitive from a business
perspective, it serves as an effective top-of-funnel strategy for
building a loyal, passionate customer base.

Let's go back to the automotive example. The automotive industry makes
money from selling a physical good: your car. Building that physical car
involves a built-in cost for each unit sold, which needs to be recouped.
In this case, building 1 million cars requires a higher manufacturing
cost than building 100,000. In the case of software, building a product
used by 1 million people is no more or less costly than building
software used by 100,000, support costs (or infrastructure for SaaS
companies) aside. In other words, the cost of software for 1 million
users remains the same as the cost for 100,000, allowing you the freedom
and flexibility to explore different models for monetization. For
instance, you can establish ways to increase sales among existing users.

You may have heard that acquiring a new customer can be
[[https://www.outboundengine.com/blog/customer-retention-marketing-vs-customer-acquisition-marketing/#:~:text=Acquiring%20a%20new%20customer%20can,customer%20is%205%2D20%25][/5x
more expensive/]] than selling to your existing customer. Existing users
already know your product, they have developed some loyalty to it, and
they have a vested interest in contributing to improve the product upon
which they rely.



The question comes down to how to convert free users to paying
customers, but the answer may appear more straightforward than you
realize: Offer a product that is valuable enough to pay for. If your
software provides enough enhanced value over the free version, a subset
of users will pay for it. This is similar to the freemium strategy
deployed in the mobile industry. For example, if 10% of your user base
will pay for your enhanced-value software, and you grow your user base
from 100,000 to 1 million people (10% of 1 million is more than 10% of
100,000), then you position yourself for commercial opportunity. It's a
strategy that existed well before the open source movement in the form
of free trials and basic free services.

To be successful with this approach:

- Know what your users are willing to pay for
- Be able to adjust your product to stay ahead of needs and ahead of the
  community potentially implementing features
- Maintain a steady growth rate of users trying, deploying, and running
  your software
- Improve your conversion rates from free users to paid users

* Common open source business models

In the open source space, the upsell can take a few forms. Let's walk
through the most common ones.

** Open core

 Open core is the most classic open source commercialization strategy. It
 consists of giving away a basic or foundational product for free and
 only asking people to pay for a more enhanced version of the open source
 product. This version is typically called the enterprise version and
 enables greater efficiency as well as additional, more robust features.
 To illustrate, imagine giving away free cars, but the gas tank of these
 free cars can only fill up to two gallons at a time. In contrast, if
 someone pays the full price for the car, that individual can get a full
 20 gallons and increase the range from 50 miles on one tank to 500
 miles. The open core model operates similarly.

 {{< image src="/images/1000000000000318000003112025EB7DED0EE1C9.png" position="center" style="border-radius: 8px;" >}}

 Many companies have started with an open core model. Within this model,
 the primary differentiator consists of enterprise features, such as
 encryption, security, and scalability. Larger companies with deeper
 pockets are more likely to buy a software license and support contract.
 Another popular open core tactic is to make the server software fully
 open source but the tooling for easily operating, developing against, or
 managing it as part of a paid- offering.‚Äù

 Risk of competition from the community presents the biggest challenge
 with open core. Other companies in the space as well as contributors,
 will often provide viable alternatives to your enterprise components. In
 the last five years, we have seen more and more users who feel that open
 source versions are good enough and refuse to pay for the tooling or
 features that open core versions offer. They prioritize easy-to-use over
 high-end features. Consequently, more and more people view the cloud as
 a better investment.


** SaaS/PaaS/XaaS

 Over the last five years, X as a service has become the most popular
 model. It seems that almost all open source companies now run or try to
 build a cloud or an as a service offering. In this model, you allow
 people to run the software as open source on their own but then offer a
 managed cloud offering so that they don't have to manage it for
 themselves. This is often paired with features exclusive to the cloud
 space. Going back to the automotive example, it's like an automotive
 lease. You don't own the car---you lease it. The dealer takes care of
 most of the maintenance and you can use the car as long as you pay. If
 you drive more miles than the lease allows, then you pay more.

 {{< image src="/images/100000000000058A000002BB5B2CFEAA28EC936A.png" position="center" style="border-radius: 8px;" >}}

 Many open source companies choose this model comes because it provides a
 higher degree of stickiness or lock-in. They rely on you not only to
 provide the software but also operate it and make sure it stays running,
 safe, and updated. In addition, you gain a lot more information on how
 your users are using your product, which can be used to enhance,
 improve, and expand your software and offering. Finally, usage data and
 workload patterns can help identify expansion opportunities as well as
 stave off churn.

 The biggest challenge in the cloud space is that the market is already
 crowded. Although not all open source software lends itself to a cloud
 offering, the most widely used infrastructure tools already have
 versions or similar tools available in most major cloud providers. As a
 result, you must convince users that your offering provides greater
 value over the more integrated cloud provider stacks. Users looking for
 the easy route will choose the path of least resistance.

** Support and services

 Another classic open source business model is offering support or
 services. In this model, you anticipate that a percentage of your users
 will need dedicated help running, setting up, or troubleshooting the
 software. Going back to our automotive example, this is like an extended
 warranty plan or a maintenance contract that includes regular oil
 changes, maintenance, and emergency repairs.

 Large enterprises still value a support contract and will often pay a
 premium for it. Despite the fact that a significant number run their own
 internal cloud and don't rely on a public cloud, companies are
 increasingly opting for a managed service or cloud offering that
 includes support and operational management. For open source businesses,
 providing services is the easiest starting point for driving revenue.

 The biggest barrier with a service-based model is proving your value.
 Otherwise, customers will not renew their contracts. If a customer pays
 for insurance but never uses it, the customer will constantly question
 the value of that expense. This is especially true in the open source
 space where customers could turn to the community for free support in a
 time of need. Furthermore, the margin for services is generally very low
 and not attractive to investors.

* The open source funnel

The success of all these models relies on driving people from a free to
paid relationship, a journey outlined by the open source funnel.

The open source funnel differs from the classic marketing funnel, which
looks something like this:



{{< image src="/images/1000000000000585000000E12B3211947FFAB7AC.png" position="center" style="border-radius: 8px;" >}}

With the marketing funnel, you want to generate inquiries and grow your
digital traffic and engagement so that eventually, those who interact
with your site become a lead or contact. After a specific number or set
of events, whether it is clicking on a webpage, registering for a
webinar, opening up an email, or watching a video, the lead eventually
qualifies as a marketing qualified lead (MQL). The MQL becomes a sales
accepted lead (SAL) once the lead is ready for the sales team's
follow-up and thereafter turns into a sales qualified lead (SQL) once
the lead has advanced through the sales pipeline. SQLs will likely
become customers and either become lost deals or closed won deals.

In contrast, the open source funnel looks something like this:


{{< image src="/images/100002010000051D00000258A8939A1BBC9A166B.png" position="center" style="border-radius: 8px;" >}}

With more interest comes more downloads, and with more downloads comes
more production deployments as well as more users who are willing to pay
for something of value. Naturally, dropoff will occur at each stage.
Nonetheless, open source provides the advantage of a larger-than-normal
pool in the initial interest phase, which can very nicely set up the
rest of the funnel for maximal conversion.

In companies focused on product-led growth, you may be more familiar
with using the growth flywheel:

{{< image src="/images/100000000000051E000005183B9425511CE29FA9.png" position="center" style="border-radius: 8px;" >}}

In this setup, evaluators are those reviewing your project and
downloading it. Beginners are those using it in production. Regulars are
those willing to pay. Champions are fans of you and the open source
project.



The flywheel can also be applied to open source companies, as
represented below:

{{< image src="/images/1000000000000307000002EADA41F831A6BA0FAE.png" position="center" style="border-radius: 8px;" >}}

You still attract people to your open source project, engage with them,
and generate interest, but that interest causes them to try your open
source project first for a non-production workload (e.g., a small trial
application or just trying to build something on a laptop ). The goal is
to make that experimental experience so exceptional that it makes them
want to move a production workload to the software or build new
applications with the software. The more comfort a user gains with the
project, the more applications that they will want to deploy and the
more they will want to use your software in production. Note: It may
prove easier to create advocates and evangelists from your free users
than it may be to create paying customers.

At this point, two goals emerge: First, you want them to share their
experiences with others to propel further interest in the project and
help you grow your potential user base. Second, once they rely on your
software for mission-critical applications, you want them to recognize
the value of and experiment with your enterprise offering. In this way,
they enter into a similar cycle of trying the software or service and
eventually moving into production.

Whether you're looking at the flywheel or open source funnel, more users
trying your open source software is always better. This is why many
companies prioritize acquiring the largest open source install base
possible first and foremost. With millions of users, you can eventually
image out how to monetize the user base even if your customer base is
relatively small now. In fact, this philosophy of growth at all costs
has dominated much of the industry over the last five years.

Since the beginning of 2022, the shift in economic climate has caused
companies to reevaluate their plans. Efficiency and a faster path toward
profitability have replaced the growth-at-all-costs mentality, leading
to more emphasis on conversion rates and customer acquisition costs
(CAC). The switch from gaining more users to growing the /right/ users
has made messaging, positioning, and targeting specific personas vital
for growth.

* Efficiency, renewal, expansion, and growth

Gaining massive year-over-year growth for your open source project is
easier starting out than after you have an established project. It is
not uncommon to see projects and companies grow 4--5x year over year. As
a project reaches market saturation, growth gradually tapers off and the
focus turns to feature set and functionality expansion so that you can
jump into new markets (for instance, a NoSQL database focused on
documents adding transactional and relational workloads.

As the company matures, you want to expand the usage of existing
customers and leverage the hard work of having already acquired them. In
fact, many larger organizations plan for 125% net retention from their
customer base (simply check out the annual or quarterly earnings reports
from some of your favorite open source companies). Effectively, these
companies expect $1.00 of revenue from customers this year to deliver
$1.25 next year. They achieve this only by reducing churn and expanding
the usage of products within existing customers. Regardless of your
business model, continued success requires you to build natural pathways
for expansion.

* 

* The importance of growth for commercial success

An increasing number of open source projects are becoming commercially
viable. Companies looking to scale these projects must rely on growth
metrics for a variety of reasons. First,
[[https://about.scarf.sh/post/how-to-attract-open-source-investors][/investors
seek indicators/]] that projects will deliver a good return on their
investment. A growing user base indicates a growing potential customer
base. Second, understanding the potential customer pool is vital to
understanding how to build and structure your business. With growth
comes new opportunities to expand the project, enhance the feature set,
and pull in more contributors, users, and eventually customers, who
augment the use cases of your project, bring fresh ideas, and provide
vital feedback. Finally, the right set of growth metrics also provides
insight into what is not working and what adjustments need to be made.

* The challenge of tracking adoption and usage

When we talk about growing an open source project, we often refer to
growing its adoption and usage. A burgeoning user base yields a
cascading impact on the rest of the project, often leading to more
contributors, more community engagement, more funding opportunities,
more potential sales, and more downstream effects. Tracking adoption,
however, in the open source space is difficult. Ideally, you would be
able to count the actual number of people using your software, but in
reality, that is not an option---users value their privacy, downloads
come from third-party repositories, people build from source code, and
software with baked-in telemetry is commonly frowned upon. In an effort
to try and understand the adoption cycle, you are usually left examining
a series of metrics that reflect and indicate interest, awareness,
adoption, and contributions but that don't fully match true usage.

* Why can't you track running instances?

Tracking running instances requires telemetry built into your software
that calls home and sends some data packets back. Although a number of
users are willing to provide this level of data, many are concerned over
how the level of tracking and overall implementation of such a system
affects their privacy. The open source companies that have implemented
built-in telemetry (or at least tried to) have experienced varying
degrees of success, including community backlash, which in some cases
have diminished the user base.

In fact our experience is that even when the data collected by two
different entities are entirely identical, people are sensitive to how
the data is collected. Scarf saw that end users were actually more
comfortable with completely silent pixel tracking than they were with
phone home mechanisms in NPM packages (despite it being a subset of what
NPM was already collecting).



This begs the question of how you would not only come to understand
/who/ is using your software but also /how/ they are using it three,
six, to 12 months after installation and even continuously, if possible,
without compromising trust.

* What about the cloud?

The cloud to some degree can provide a way around this. When people sign
up for a cloud-based service they provide their information and grant
you authorization both to run the software for them and access more
granular metrics on their usage. As a result, you can gain a detailed
understanding of their needs. That said, most open source software falls
outside of the cloud space. Most cloud providers who provide open source
as a service offer the commercialized version of what is already
downloadable and installable without a commercial agreement. Still, a
large portion of the user base exists that will try out the open source
software on their own either via downloaded packages, containers, or
building from source. What about getting adoption and usage details for
those users?

* Measuring success

** Top of the open source funnel: How do you track interest?

 Isn't open source largely tracked via contributor usage? Should
 GitHub-esque metrics remain the de facto standard for project health,
 adoption, and growth? The answer to both questions is no. Contributor
 metrics are great, but they don't predict the commercial success of a
 product. Having more contributors than other similar projects may look
 good on paper, but that doesn't denote users. Similarly, an increase in
 the number of contributors, pull requests, or issues on GitHub does not
 mean your project's user base is growing. It could even indicate the
 opposite. Growing the contributor base is certainly a directionally
 helpful indicator of a project's health and adoption, but it does not
 always directly correlate, nor is it a comprehensive measure considering
 all the other factors to take into account. So, what metrics should you
 look at to understand the overall growth of your project?

[[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/intro_awareness/][/>> read more about awareness/]]

*** Contributors (code or evangelist)

  Tracking contributors still matters, but the way in which you do it
  makes a difference. Several projects have a handful of large corporate
  entities that contribute heavily to the code base of a project. You'll
  see spikes in contributors over time when in reality, those indicate
  when a new company joined the ecosystem. Tracking the companies, as well
  as the individuals who contribute, can help mitigate this. If a company
  or individual cares enough about the project to contribute to it, you
  are seeing growth. You can track such metrics in GitHub/GitLab,
  Bitergia, or in a tool like Orbit or Common Room that aggregates
  multiple sources.



  The caveat is that measuring the overall growth of all advocates, not
  just the code contributors, is difficult. Besides examining the number
  of people contributing to the code, you also want to look at the number
  of people releasing videos, blogs, talks, and other content into your
  ecosystem. These soft contributions can show project growth and success
  even better than hardcore code metrics, but tracking them is often
  manual.

  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/contributor_metrics][/>> read more about contributor metrics/]]


*** Tracking the number of GitHub or GitLab stars

  Another important top-of-funnel metric is project traffic and activity
  on sites like GitHub or GitLab, which offer more meaningful data over a
  metric like GitHub stars. In principle, more stars on GitHub would seem
  to equate to more interest or growth, but there is cause to think twice.
  A cursory search shows that dozens of services will give hundreds or
  thousands of stars to your project for only a few dollars. Some projects
  hold a suspiciously large number of stars for the code available.

  Rather, project traffic and activity as reflected by the number of
  issues, merges, commits, etc., on GitHub, prove more telling. Moreover,
  it is more important to evaluate the number of unique users performing
  those activities over the raw number of activities. Unique traffic to
  your repositories, the unique number of forks, and the unique number of
  clones of your repo are all worth tracking in order to gauge growth.
  
  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/repo_popularity_metrics][/>> read more about popularity metrics/]]

*** Website traffic and digital presence

  We've covered some key metrics for measuring interest that come from
  external sources. Let's take a closer look at some of the internal
  sources of data within your company that you can review. To access these
  numbers, you can employ a service such as Google Analytics, Chartbeat,
  Semrush, Amplitude Analytics, or Pendo, and work with your web
  development team to gain access.

  Unique views

  Because bots and crawlers on the web can cause peaks in website traffic,
  identifying the number of unique views or companies interacting with
  your site is more valuable than the number of raw page views. You should
  be able to track the trend of your traffic over time and explain the
  dips and spikes. Growth of uniques over time shows increasing interest
  in your product.
  
  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/website_traffic][/>> read more about traffic metrics/]]

**** Engagement with documentation, tutorials, and guides

   Another indicator of interest in your product lies in a subset of your
   website traffic: engagement with docs, tutorials, and guides. Increased
   traffic of unique visitors in these sections typically signals more
   people who are seriously interested in trying out your product. It is
   also important to note that there are different weights to people's
   actions that you should take into account, for instance, someone who
   revisits your website over and over again or someone who reviews your
   pricing page indicates more interest than merely a one-time visit to the
   homepage.

**** Referrals

   Bear in mind that metrics do not merely revolve around the absolute
   numbers. It is also important to know where the numbers come from to
   evaluate reach and awareness. You want to know what external sites or
   platforms served as the channel by which someone landed on your website.
   This requires an understanding of who is linking to your content, what
   other websites mention your product, and what other websites reshare
   your content.

   [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/website_referrals][/>> read more about referrals metrics/]]

**** Share of voice

   Share of voice attempts to measure your share of a market and overall
   awareness. When people search for, talk about, or suggest tools in this
   space, how often are you in that conversation? How do you rank in search
   engine optimization (SEO)? How many mentions do you get versus your
   competition? Are you receiving external press and coverage? A lot of
   companies spend an enormous amount of time, money, and effort chasing
   mindshare only to find that they did not get the outcome that they
   expected. Due to the nebulous and complicated nature of calculating
   share of voice, we recommend waiting until later on in a project
   lifecycle to attempt to measure this.

   [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/share_of_voice][/>> read more about share of voice metrics/]]

*** Social reach

  Your social reach centers less around an individual metric and more
  around a series of metrics aggregated to give an overall picture of
  growth among your followers. Typically, we seek growth in the following:

  - Number of followers
  - The number of likes/shares
  - Engagement: How many people have been part of a discussion on social
    media?
	
  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/social_reach][/>> read more about social reach metrics/]]

** Middle of the open source funnel: How do you track usage?

 Once a user shows interest, the next step is to encourage a download,
 grabbing of a Docker container, or grabbing of the source code itself to
 experiment with. This is the first time when your product can speak for
 itself. For a project maintainer or owner, this is also the first
 concrete step for increasing project adoption.

 The disadvantage in this phase is the difficulty of collecting data
 because the default tends to be anonymity. In many cases, it is
 challenging to collect and measure the data without a third-party tool
 or service.

 Nevertheless, there are ways to work with what you have. You can review
 the metrics outlined below to get a sense of how usage of your product
 is trending.
 
 [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/adoption_metrics][/>> read more about adoption metrics/]]

*** Raw downloads

  The total raw number of downloads can indicate how your project is
  growing but should always be taken with a pinch of salt. The risks
  include redownloads, whether by bots or by real users, which can skew
  numbers and be misleading if looked at in isolation.
  
*** Scrubbed unique downloads

  Scrubbed unique downloads are a slight modification on raw downloads and
  aim to identify the real number of downloads by looking at how many
  unique companies or users have downloaded your software.
  
  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/download_metrics][/>> read more about download metrics/]]  

*** Enhanced download metrics with metadata

  Identifying the unique person downloading and using your software is
  challenging with open source, but fortunately there are tools and
  methods available that can at least provide enriched metadata about your
  users, including location, company, other pages that they may have
  accessed on the website, and the like. You can pull this information
  from the logs or employ a tool like
  [[https://app.scarf.sh/register][/Scarf/]].
  
  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/download_meta_data][/>> read more about download metadata metrics/]]

*** Net new users/companies

  This one is quite straightforward. It is essential to understand how
  many new people are trying your software.

  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/net_new_users][/>> read more about net new metrics/]]
  
*** Signups

  If you have a SaaS offering and a free tier, you'll automatically have a
  concrete metric for knowing how many people are experimenting with your
  product because it will require a signup to get started. What is more,
  users will likely tell you who they are during the onboarding process
  because of the information that you ask them to enter when signing up.

  Once you have a solid understanding of how your product is used, the
  next step is to analyze behavior that precedes conversion.
  
  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/user_signups][/>> read more about signup metrics/]]

*** Page, docs, or source-to-download conversion ratios

  You should know what leads a user to download. Understanding which
  content, pages, docs, or other sources or channels users visit before
  deciding to download helps you optimize and increase those numbers
  because you get a better sense of what your target audience seeks.
  
  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/user_conversion_ratios][/>> read more about conversion ratios/]]

*** Docs views from those who have already downloaded

  We've talked above about the need to track documentation and website
  traffic, but it is also important to track views from those who have
  already downloaded your software or packages. Some users may only
  download once and often deploy from that single download. This means
  that the actual deployments or usage of your software may be hidden
  behind a single download number. Tracking downloads and continued
  engagement on the website and from docs will reveal continued usage.


** Bottom of the open source funnel: Who is using your product, and more importantly, who is willing to pay?

*** Redownloads or multiple downloads over time

  The same users downloading your software over and over again shows
  ongoing usage and possible growth of the number of installs. This number
  and rate of downloads can also help determine changes to deployments or
  the overall install base that may occur.
  
  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/redownload_metrics][/>> read more about redownload metrics/]]

*** Users still active 90 days after their first install

  The best predictor for potential production usage or a possible future
  customer is ongoing usage. You want users to still actively use the
  software 90 days after downloading and installing it, and to do so after
  180 days is even better. If the number of users who drop off before 90
  days is high, then either the value of the software may be too low or
  the barrier of entry may be too high. To track active instances or uses
  of the software, you can use some lightweight telemetry or in the
  absence of that, repeated downloads.

*** Companies and organizations using the software for more than six months

  Whereas the above metric focuses on users, this metric focuses on the
  total number of users at a single company or organization. Multiple
  users at the same company might be downloading and using the software.
  If you know that multiple users from the same company use your product
  repeatedly, that is a powerful indicator of potential growth.
  
  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/ongoing_sustained_usage][/>> read more about ongoing usage metrics/]]

*** Company downloads accompanied by GitHub repo activity and issues

 Another powerful indicator of potential customers is the number of those
 who download your product and then open issues in GitHub or commit code
 to your repositories.
 
 [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/merging_repo_download_metrics][/>> read more about correlated metrics/]]

*** Call home telemetry: Instances/installs running at a company

 The best way to track growth is to understand how many companies and
 users actively use your software and whether they are increasing or
 decreasing the number of active deployments. You want to know the number
 of active instances, the number of new instances running in the last X
 days, the number of churned instances, etc.
 
 [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/call_home_metrics][/>> read more about call home metrics/]]

** Customers, users, and retention

 Every company tracks a set of business metrics that they review on a
 regular basis, which may include metrics such as annual or monthly
 recurring revenue (ARR or MRR), the number of customers, and net
 revenue. Open source specific metrics complement these standard business
 ones. A thriving open source business will focus on both, together with
 the acquisition of net new customers and retention of existing
 customers. Consider taking a closer look at these as you seek to
 evaluate the bottom of your open source funnel.

 [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/customer_metrics][/>> read more about customer metrics/]]

*** User-to-customer ratio


 The ratio of users to paying customers is one of the top five metrics
 that you should track and constantly look to improve. You can acquire
 customers by increasing the overall number of users and improving the
 conversion rate. Early on, you may find it easier to increase the
 overall users by orders of magnitude, but as the market changes, the
 growth rate slows down as you capture more and more of the available
 market. This is why converting users to customers is critical.
 
 [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/customer_conversion_ratios][/>> read more about customer conversion metrics/]]

*** Instance and user churn

  Once you know the number of instances of your software running in unique
  organizations, you can identify dwindling counts of installed or running
  instances, which can foreshadow the potential churn of a customer.
  Decreases in the number of users or instances may indicate issues within
  the software or losses to competition.

  [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/churn_instances][/>> read more about instance churn metrics/]]
  
*** Customer advocates

 Earlier we highlighted the significance of tracking contributors
 (whether it's code contributions or evangelism), but it is also
 important to segment out and track paying customers. Paying customers
 who are active in your community are a valuable source of feedback and
 help instill confidence in potential users and customers.

 [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/customer_advocates][/>> read more about customer advocates metrics/]]
 
** Open source competitive analysis

 Check if your key users and customers are contributing to your
 competitive open source products. Their behavior will serve as a useful
 predictor of potential churn.
 
 [[https://opensourcemetrics.org/metrics/predictive_churn][/>> read more about predictive churn metrics/]]

 {{< image src="/images/100000000000060A0000035BD89F24088D3B336F.png" position="center" style="border-radius: 8px;" >}}

* Conclusion

Not every department or team will value all of the above metrics the
same, but these metrics as a whole do track the various stages of the
user and customer lifecycle. Based on these metrics, you can gauge the
overall interest in an open source project and determine if your
decisions result in further adoption. Marketing and sales can ensure a
growing funnel and close more deals. VC firms can evaluate business
performance and receive assurance that their investments produce
promising ROI. What is more, you can use the insights to improve your
product and better satisfy the needs of your target audience.

Even though open source has existed for a while, the playbook for open
source done right is still in the making and ever evolving. Despite
three major models repeatedly emerging in the space, there truly is no
traditional path for the open source business. Yet the need to account
for growth, as with any company, still applies.

Measuring the interest, adoption, and growth of open source projects
extends beyond just contributors. It is important to triangulate key
metrics within each stage of the open source funnel to draw meaningful
analysis and conclusions that can help you understand how users are
progressing through the customer journey. One of the many beauties of
open source is that it provides a broad user base by opening up the
technology to anyone and everyone who takes interest thanks to virtually
no financial barrier to entry, or any barrier at all! To that end, if
you can appeal to loyal existing users and find a way to both monetize
and augment their usage, the possibilities could be exceedingly
beneficial and worth billions of dollars. Open source creators plus
data-driven insights make for a powerful combination.

Understandably, setting up the metrics essential to achieving this can
feel cumbersome and time consuming. If you are serious about sustaining
the growth of your open source business and want help with measuring the
metrics discussed in this paper and more, you can
[[https://about.scarf.sh/][/check out Scarf/]] and learn about package
SDKs, Scarf Gateway, documentation insights, and open source support.
The tools created by Scarf make it easy to track downloads as well as
gain visibility into the user lifecycle.

[[https://app.scarf.sh/register][/Get started with Scarf today/]] or
feel free to [[https://about.scarf.sh/contact][/contact us/]] if you
have any questions.

